Now, let's walk through the solution of insertion.
First, I defined a comparison function
just to be more general because when you're comparing the values,
if there are simple things like numbers,
you can say one is less than the other.
If the value is some kind of object,
then you would want to figure out what in the object you want to compare with the other,
and so I'm just writing this to make it more general,
but here we're just going to return zero when the values are equal,
negative one when the new value is less than the current one that's being compared to.
In other words, when we want to traverse left,
we return a negative one,
and then when we return a one if
the new node's value is greater than the current node that is being compared to.
In other words, we return one when we want to traverse to the right.
Here's how we can insert using a while loop.
We have the new value,
we're going to wrap it inside a node object.
We're also going to get the root,
and if the root is actually empty,
that means we have an empty tree.
We can go ahead and set the root to that new node.
Otherwise, we're going to use a loop to walk down the tree.
First we'll do a comparison of the new node and the current node.
In this case, we're starting out with the root.
If they're equal, then we'll just set the value of the node to the new node's value.
Notice that because this node may have other children nodes already,
then this will have a left and right pointer,
and so basically, we don't want to say node equals new node because the new node is
something we just created and it doesn't have pointers to
the left and right children that this current node might actually have.
So that means we've inserted the node
and so we can go ahead and break out of the loop. So stop looping.
Otherwise, if the comparison is negative one,
I define this to mean we want to traverse to the left
because the new value is less than the current node that we're comparing to,
and if the node already has a left child,
then we want to continue traversing left.
So get left child,
becomes the new node.
Then at this point, we're going to be returning back to the top of the loop in this case.
Otherwise, if there is room to set the left child to the new node,
then we'll go ahead and do that,
and that means we've inserted in node so we can break out of the loop,
so we'll stop looping.
This is the case when we need to continue traversing down the tree,
so we continue on with a while loop,
and this is the case when we've found a place to insert the node,
and so we can stop traversing and break out of the loop.
It's the same thing when we go down to the right subtree.
Now with recursion, we can do the same thing.
So here we'll start out checking if the root is none.
If so, we can just set the root to that value and then we're done.
Otherwise, we're going to make a recursive call to this helper function right here.
We're going to pass in the root and
also the node containing the value that we're trying to insert.
Now what this is doing is it has
a current node that is comparing to and also the new node,
so we'll do a comparison,
and then if they're equal,
then we should set the value to the value of the new node.
We're overriding it essentially.
Otherwise, if we want to give us negative one,
it means we need to traverse left,
and it's similar to what you saw before.
If the node already has a left child,
then we're going to continue traversing left.
Here we can use a recursive call to this function.
So we're calling it again,
and now we're passing in the nodes
left child as well as the new node that we're trying to insert.
Otherwise, if there's room,
we can set the left child to the new node and then we're done,
and similar with the case when we need to traverse right.
When the value of the new node is greater than the current node,
then we're traversing right.
Now let's try this out.
We're going to insert a couple values here.
We're also going to insert a duplicate which should be overridden,
and you can see here is a tree.
Five is at the root,
five is left child is four,
and its right child is six because four is less than five,
six is greater than five.
Now four is left child is two because two is less than four,
two is also less than five.
Similarly, with the recursive version of it,
we should get the same results.